---
path: "/blog/2020/09/04/filtering2"
date: "2020-09-"04
title: "The new Filtering API"
tags: ["hotchocolate", "graphql", "dotnet", "aspnetcore","filtering"]
featuredImage: "shared/hotchocolate-banner.png"
author: Pascal Senn
authorUrl: https://github.com/pascal_senn
authorImageUrl: https://avatars0.githubusercontent.com/u/14233220
---

With version 11 we release a complete rewrite of filtering, sorting and selections. With our initial release a few versions back we decided to use a similar syntax as Prisma did. Initially this looked like a very intuitive way of declaring filters. In preview releases of version 11 we already shipped some extensions, like object filters and list filters.

We started investigating into opening up the API for users that want to provide their own set of filters or write their own database providers. Quickly we realized that the API was not good enough for a public release and, even worse, the underlying GraphQL syntax was not ideal. 

This was a huge setback for us, but we still went back to the drawing board and made a complete redesign of it. We looked at a lot of different implementation of similar features and combined with the experience we made, we settled on a similar approach to Hasura or Postgraphile.

The main issue with the filters released with version 10, is the strict binding of field and operation. The discussion and a detailed description of issue we faced can be followed in this [Issue on GitHub]( https://github.com/ChilliCream/hotchocolate/issues/2044) 

Here is a quick summary:

This approach works great with scalar filters.

```graphql
where: {
    foo_contains: “bar”
}
```

We bundled the field and the operation together into an easy to understand and straight forward GraphQL field.

Object filters would add another level of nesting:

```graphql
where: {
    foo: {
        bar_contains:”bar”
    }
}
```

For array filters we came up with a mixture of nesting and bundling. With list filters the problems already begin to start. It is already required to have helper (`el_XXX`) syntax to access the element of a list: 

```graphql
where: {
    foo_some: {
        el_gt:4
   }
} 
```

As soon as we dived deeper into possible extension, the problems became more severe and the API becomes a lot more inconsistent. A good example of this issue is when we want to filter by the length of a string. We could filter by `foo_length_gt:4` or `foo_length: { is_gt: 4}` or even `foo: {length: {is_gt:4}}`. All of these approaches would follow the style guide. The first would be like we define filters for field, the second similar to the list filters and the last one would be like the object filters. 

# The New Filtering 
With the new filtering API, there is a fundamental change. Operations and fields are not longer bundled together into one GraphQL field. 

Here is a quick overview of the examples listed above:

Scalar filters: 
```graphql
where: {
    foo: { 
        contains: “bar”
    }
}
```

Object filters: 
``` 
where: {
    foo: { 
        bar { 
            contains: “bar”
        } 
   }
}
```

List filters:

```graphql
where: {
    foo: {
        some: {
            gt: 4
        }
   }
}
```

As the API now is based on nesting, every combination of field and operation feels lot more natural. When you like to filter by the length of a string, the resulting API looks seamless:
```graphql
where: {
    foo: {
        length: {
            gt: 4
        }
   }
}
```

# THIS IS BREAKING MY API!
We know. We had long discussion about this. We feel confident that this new approach is the right way to go and it is designed to stay. The 10.X.X filters are still available in version 11. They will be deprecated though and will be removed in version 12. 

# The Data Package
With version 11 we introduce a new package for Hot Chocolate. We created a new package called `HotChocolate.Data`. This package contains `HotChocolate.Data.Filtering`, `HotChocolate.Data.Sorting` and `HotChocolate.Data.Projections`. 

# Migrating from 10 to 11
We could not avoid conflicts in names between the old and the new filtering. You can use static imports or full qualified names if you need to have the old and the new API in the same file. 

If you have full control over the frontend, the easiest way to migrate is to just replace the old filtering with the new one and do the necessary changes in the frontend. 

If this is not an option for you, then you will have to declare new fields and deprecate the old ones. You may even use the filters on the same fields, but you will end up with conflicting argument names. 

# Getting started

You first need to add the new `HotChocolate.Data` package to the project. 

It is also required to register filtering on the schema builder:
```csharp
public void ConfigureServcies(IServiceCollection services) {
    services.AddGraphQLServer()
        .AddQueryType<Query>()
        .AddFiltering();
}
``` 

You are now all set and ready to use the filters. For a pure code first approach you can use the attribute `[UseFiltering]` and for code first you can use the `.UseFiltering()` extension method.

```csharp
// pure code first
public class Query {
     public IQueryable<Foo> Foos([Service]DbContext context) => context.Foos;
}

//code first
public class Query : ObjectType {
    protected override void Configure(IObjectTypeDescriptor descriptor) {
        descriptor
            .Field<Reslover>(x => x.Foos(default!))
            .UseFiltering();
    }

    public class Resolver {
        public IQueryable<Foo> Foos([Service]DbContext context) => context.Foos;
    }
}
```

# How does it work?
The new filtering API comes with a lot changes to the core. The Data package is completely separated from the Hot Chocolate core and no internal APIs are used. 
.....

## Type Interceptor
....
## Scoping
...
## Conventions
....
## What else? 
....
